
During the time of the Qing Dynasty in 1644 - 1911, China's Agricultural and Economic status flourished through various agricultural innovations expanding the global economy and trade networks. Those developments introduced many outstanding levels of excess agricultural products which in turn enabled the state and local economy to expand its local production to both the domestic consumption and export it to neighboring regions and to other places like Europe. After the people have realized the economic potential on the export of goods, the Qing government had established the Canton system, a framework concentrating for foreign trades at the port of Canton. The system would allow China to take part in global commerce while maintaining strict political control over foreign merchants who decides to make deals with them. The development of the Canton System lead to and shaped China’s agricultural strength by having improvements in farming techniques, introduction of new crops, and the massive increase in population which created an influx of wealth and stability which made the controlled foreign trade both possible and profitable.

During the Qing dynasty, Agricultural productivity increased dramatically in 17th-century China due to both new crops and improved techniques. One of the significant factors were the introduction of new crops, most notable being the Maize Corn and Sweet Potatoes and traditional stables like rice and wheat. (Land MDPI) These crops spread across China as they were easy to grow and harvest, this allowed more people to migrate to more parts of Southwest China like Yunnan, Guizhou and parts of the Sichuan Province. During that time between 1700 and 1850, the population grew from a staggering 5 million to 20 million, almost quadrupling the population because of it.  (Food Supply, James) The population at the time pushed agricultural boundaries which increased into previously marginal lands, and it further improved the agricultural expansion and economic growth. While the crops were robust and high yielding in return, they helped provide a stable source of food for the farmers and it was easily sellable to make a profit as they provide a good source of nutrients and were cheap. Farmers at the time also adopted many types of farming techniques to help maximize plant growth and yielding the highest return. Some notable techniques include Water management, Land Reclamation, Intensive Cultivation and Labor Input. (Conflicting Counsels to confuse) These agricultural improvements did not simply raise food output. they fundamentally reshaped the economic structure of rural China by allowing households to produce consistent surpluses rather than farming only for survival. At the same time these changes to the Agricultural expansion not only supported the population growth but it also created necessary things needed for the domestic markets and later for export production.

(Population growth)
Population growth during the 17th century was closely tied to the increase of agricultural production as more reliable food resources allowed more communities to expand. By the early Qing period, China’s population rose significantly due to immigration from other neighboring regions because of the easy farming capabilities. At first the populations slowly increased by about a couple percent during the 1700 but approximately 50 years later the numbers drastically increased to about 10 percent of the 20 million total population that was recited in the mid 19th century. (Food Supply James lee) Another contribution to the population growth was the increase access and excess amount of foods that were produced and also the increase of new hires and labour needed to produce and main the crops. With that it led to more rural households that were able to produce more exportable materials, most notable being tea, silk, and porcelains. (Conflicting counsels BOOK) With the additions of population growth, it also meant having larger internal markets. There would be more buyers and sellers that emerged in the towns which meant more networks that were connected to inland farming regions and coastal trading centres like the Canton Region. With the increase of more farmlands being built and cultivated, the Qing dynasty in turn collected more taxes and generated a lot more income. The steady revenue was crucial for funding <u>bureucratic and administrative systems</u> and later enforced the canton system. With that it had shown that the demographic of China and the economic matches hand in hand is agricultural efficiency had increased, its population also increased making demands for specialized productions. 
 
(Canton System)
With the appearance of the Canton System arising during (1747-1842), it was a way for the Qing governments to maintain and manage foreign trades that come in and out of canton. At the time it also capitalized on all the agricultural wealth by selling most of their crops to foreign countries like Europe for silver. While the system focuses on most of the foreign trades that occur within Canton, the state is able to control the the interaction between the Chinese merchants. During those times they would be collecting taxes and the port, prevent smuggling excess goods onto the ships and also prevent and defend any political interferences that would occur  could effect future trades. At that time the Canton system was the very type of system that was introduced in China in 1757. (Ebsco) The canton system is ran by a License merchants known as the Cohong, their main purpose was to authorize trades that would come in and out with the western merchants. (Briticana Cohong) At that time they were the only merchants that existed during the begining of the system so they in turn made the most profit from it because of the amount of taxes they collected from foreign traders. With agricultural production, it directly enabled the Canton system to function as both a political and as a economic tool. Tying to all this, the agricultural resources direct

(Explain brief on how the trades work, source), (Explain Cohong) 
 
Conclusion 
