
Introduction:
With the case of Emily, James, and Dr. Lukas, there are many complications that arise between the confidentiality and autonomy of the doctor and the patients. After James learned about the complications that arise from the genetic mutations that he carries, he has the rights of confidentiality as a patient to not let his partner, Emily, know about the condition that would most likely lead to her to choosing an abortion, which it she had expressed before to her partner. Now Dr. Lucas is caught between either informing Emily about the information, which also would breach the confidentiality of the rights as a doctor. At the same time Dr. Lucas would have the rights to inform Emily about the information, In not telling her would violate her own autonomy and potentially causing significant harm later in the pregnancy. After comparing about the pros and cons of the situation, I would argue that Dr. Lucas should disclose Jame’s genetic test results to Emily because not doing so would violate her autonomy, preventing informed consent, and exposing her to inevitable harm. Which in this case in informing Emily about the harm outweighs Jame’s confidentiality requests.

P1: Ethical Principle (Autonomy, beneficence, nonmalificients, justice) or talk about the benefits if she did compared to did not 

The ethical principles for Dr. Lucas centers around the principle of Autonomy for James (his rights to confidentiality and moral beliefs) versus the principles of beneficence (doing good for Emily) and non-maleficence (avoiding harm to Emily). If Dr. Lucas does decide to keep the information to himself, then he in turn would respect James's autonomy but at the same time violate Emily's, as she cannot make any decision on keeping the pregnancy or not. Pellegrino argues that for the doctor/physicians role is not to obey orders from patients but to give and direct advice to patients on what they could do in order to assist in the patients well being ==(Pellegrino, p.167)==.  But instead they decide to follow the choice and proceed with James's decision then it completely breaks that idea. But instead this choice also leads to maleficence, as it would force Emily to have to withhold the grudge to endure the physical and psychological harm from the pregnancy mishap that's were agaist her own wishes. If anything if Dr. Lukas informs Emily about the information, he would in turn breach James confidentiality but in turn enforces Emily's autonomy, which allows her to make her own values and her choices on terminating the pregnancy or not. Another benefit to disclosing the report to Emily is that it justifys Emily's own well being and self determination. Of all this I would argue that the significance of informing Emily about the complications outweighs James autonomy even though it it breaches James confidentiality.  

[[Paragraph 2]] 


[[P3]] 
Something that Dr. Lukas could aim to do is speaking privately with James and discuss the complications that could occur if the test results cannot ethically stay confidential as the genetic results can directly affect Emily's health and reproductive decisions. Dr. Lucas and follow up and provide counseling to James by having a one on one conversation to process his fears and ethical concerns. And also to have the therapist to encourage him to voluntarily in disclosing the information about the genetic test results to Emily so they can at least have emotional support through therapist and the doctor as well. According to Kipnis, it states even though patients understand the information gathered during the treatment, it can be passed on to others even without the persons consent ==(Kipnis, 102)==. This further would justify Dr. Lukas's rights to pass on the information to Emily and also at the same time to the therapist as it can cause harm to not only Emily but also to James himself. If James still refuses, then  Dr. Lukas would be obligated to disclose the information directly to Emily because it is a doctors job to help protect their patients and their autonomy, which in this case is Emily and her baby. At the same the issue that arises is after disclosing the information can be less damaging than if Dr. Lukas does follow with James's confidentiality, which could in turn cause much more harm to Emily and himself. 

P3 (Abortion....)

Another reason Dr. Lucas should disclose the genetic results is that abortion can be another idea where Emily could consider, whether or not if she chooses to continue with the pregnancy. 
If we view 
conclude
