The term ancestors was not simply talking about the dead of past grandparents, it was about how those who were living had their ancestors to protect them from above or have the least harm done to them. Others have performed several rituals throughout their life and given them offerings like utilitarian containers of food and drinks, precious objects like jade and cowry shells, as a sign of appreciation. All this evidence dates back to the Late Shang Dynasty and can be found on oracle bone inscriptions. For those to become ancestors, those of the recently deceased would have their spirits transformed by their support of their descendants. At times they would not be successful because tot hem time when the spirits had to link up their souls with their spirits, the energies could turn into a dangerous ghost instead does not want to help or need those who are still living. Another highlight of ancestors is that in the "Book of Documents", it portrayed Zhou as having strong beliefs in his descendant ancestors and that the powers from their descendants had contributed and gave him the power to take over the whole country. It was also said that Sacrificial odes had been performed during the early Zhou. At this time, they would have songs playing while having another person, like a impersonator, let's say the grandson, would act very happy, drink and eat to songs to have their ancestors then come and join the fun while giving them company. This is all stated in the "Book of Songs" back in the Zhou Dynasty as well.

