The significance of China's first neolithic village originally separated between two different production roles but eventually would combine together. During the early settlement, the village was divided into two, millet producing north, that were the Yellow River Basin and the Rice cultivating south, which were Yangzi valley and  Both north and south showed independent and technological advances. In the Yangzi Valley, the rice were cultivated as early as 5000BC and later on had increases of fishes and aquatic plants like water chestnuts, lotuses, and caltrops. With the south, they were very innovative, The Hemudu village were able to built wooden houses on stilts above the water to live in to maximize space on the land, they also made lacquered bowls and black potteries that had specific geometric designs. Their survival instincts were significant because at that time they used to make wooden tools like hoes, spears, mallets, and paddles to make their lives easier for everyday tasks. Compared to the later Zhou dynasty, they technological advances were very far ahead even though it was only made from wood instead of iron. Also at that time, Northern China was too cold and dry to grow rice so instead cereal became the foundation of agriculture there instead of growing millets. Even though the village were separated, the regional differences in art and burial practices showed that not all adaptations are the same but instead is stemmed from different adaptations due to climate and how they are able to adapt.  